# Electricity Theory
## Summary

Electricity encompasses the description of charges, their spatial effects, namely the so-called electric field, and their movement, the electric current. These phenomena are significant for the physician not only because of modern technology (e.g., in ECGs or for defibrillation) but also due to natural processes that are "charge-driven," such as the conduction of impulses in the nervous system. The latter will be discussed in detail in the chapter on resting and action potentials, while simple circuits and electrical devices are introduced here. In addition, there is a brief overview of magnetic phenomena generated by a flowing current.

## Electric Charge

The electric charge is one of the fundamental physical quantities and properties of the elementary building blocks of matter. Although humans do not have a sense organ for the direct perception of electric charge, discharge phenomena such as lightning or mild electric shocks from metal elements after walking on a carpet can certainly be experienced in everyday life. Since positrons and electrons are the smallest charged particles, every electric charge is a multiple of this so-called elementary charge e.

- Electric Charge
    - Formula symbol: Q or q
    - Unit: C (Coulomb)
    - Properties
        - Can take positive or negative values
            - Charges with the same sign repel each other.
            - Charges with different signs attract each other.
        - Value is an integer multiple of the elementary charges of protons or electrons.
        - Law of Conservation of Charge: In a closed system, the sum of electric charges must remain constant!
    - Coulomb's Law: Describes the force that acts between two point-like electric charges.
        - F = [1 / (4 × π × ε0)] × [q1 × q2 / r2]
            - Unit: N (Newton)
            - F = Coulomb's law force, ε0 = electric field constant, q1 and q2 = point charges, r = distance between the two charges

> [!NOTE]
> The sum of the charges in a closed system always remains constant!

### Electric Field

Electric charges generate so-called electric fields in space, which can interact with all existing charges. The forces that result from these interactions are called Coulomb forces. They are represented by so-called field lines, which describe the direction and strength of the forces.

- Electric field: Force field generated by electric charges; indicates the magnitude of the force acting on a charge in the field.
    - Formula: E = F / Q
        - Unit: N/C (Newtons per Coulomb)
        - E = electric field strength, F = Coulomb's force, Q = charge
    - Important field properties
        - Field lines always run from positive to negative charge (that is, from the positive to the negative pole)
        - In "homogeneous" fields, the electric field strength is the same everywhere.
    - Field strength: Electric voltage depending on the distance to the field-producing charge
        - Formula: E = U / d
            - Unit: V/m
            - E = electric field strength, U = voltage, d = distance
    - Interaction of the electric field
        - Positive charge: Positive charge is accelerated by the electric field in the direction of the field lines (that is, towards the negative charge).
        - Negative Charge: Negative charge is accelerated by the electric field in the opposite direction of the field lines (toward the positive charge).
        - Matter: Charged components of matter (see here: Structure of Matter) are moved within this matter.
            - Orientation: Charged or polar molecules align themselves in an electric field so that their negative (partial) charge points toward the positive pole of the field and their positive charge points toward the negative pole.
            - Polarization: By shifting the charge in the material, an electric field is formed that opposes the external field.
                - The influence of the polarization of matter in an electric field can be calculated using the dielectric constant εr.
                    - Formula: F1 / F0 = 1 / εr
                        - Unit: F/m (Farad / Meter)
                        - F0 = Force before the interaction, F1 = Force after the interaction, εr = Dielectric constant

## Electric Current

Charge that moves in a directed manner generates an electric current. This is technically used for energy transmission and is indispensable not only in everyday life but also in modern medicine. The following will present fundamental characteristics of current, the difference between direct current and alternating current, as well as simple circuits and components. Current can be described using

- Current: Indicates how much charge flows in a specific period of time.
    - Formula: I = Q / t
        - Unit: A (= C / s)
        - I = Current, Q = Charge, t = Time
- Electric Voltage: Electric voltage indicates the work that must be done to move a charge against an electric field.
    - Formula: U = W / Q
        - Unit: V ("Volt" = Joule / Coulomb)
        - U = Voltage, W = Work to be done, Q = Transferred charge
- Current density: Indicates how much current flows per area.
    - Formula: j = I / A
        - Unit: A / m2
        - j = current density, I = current strength, A = conductor cross-section
- Conductivity speed: The speed at which a charge carrier is transmitted
    - Formula: v = s / t
        - Unit: m / s
        - v = speed, s = distance, t = time
- Electrical resistance: Indicates what voltage is necessary for a certain current to flow in a conductor.
    - Formula: R = U / I (Ohm's Law)
        - Unit: Ω (Ohm)
        - R = Resistance, U = Voltage, I = Current Strength
        - Ohm's law can also be used to calculate the resistance of an alternating current, which is called impedance.
    - The resistance of a conductor depends on the length, the area, and the material properties: R = ρ × l / A
        - ρ = specific resistance of the conductor (material property), l = length of the conductor, A = area of the conductor (e.g., circle with A = 2 π (diameter/2)² or rectangle with A = length × width)
- Electrical conductance: The reciprocal of resistance, a characteristic parameter for electrical components.
    - Formula: G = 1 / R
        - Unit: S (Siemens, = 1/Ω)
        - G = Conductance, R = Resistance

> [!NOTE]
> Some properties of electric current can also be transferred to the flow of liquids, for example, in the circulatory system!

> [!NOTE]
> The electrical conductance must not be confused with electrical conductivity, which is a material constant!

###### Sample Calculation: Line Speed

In a nerve, a stimulus is transmitted over a distance of 40 cm within 0.03 seconds. What is the conduction velocity?

- Sought: Leading speed v
- Given: distance s, time t
    - v = s / t => 0.4 m / 0.03 s = 13 m/s

###### Example Calculation: Electricity

In a conductor with a cross-section of 16 mm², 6 × 10¹⁸ electrons flow per second. The voltage in the system is 25 V. What is the current density and what is the resistance of the circuit?

- Sought: Current density j, Resistance R
- Given: Number of electrons Ne, time s, conductor cross-section A, voltage U
    - Q = Ne ×e => 6 × 10^18 × 1.6 × 10^-19 C = 0.96 C
    - I = Q / t => 0.96 C / 1 s = 1 A
    - j = I / A => 1 A / 16 mm2 = 0.0625 A/mm2
    - R = U / I => R = 25 V / 1 A = 25 Ω

### Work and Electrical Current

The energy contained in electric current is also referred to as electrical work. From electrical work, taking time into account, the delivered electrical power results.

- Electrical work: Energy that must be expended to move a charge against an electric voltage, or energy that is released when a charge yields to the "pressure" of an electric voltage.
    - Formula: W = Q × U (= U × I × t)
        - Unit: J ("Joule" = C x V = N x m = W × s)
        - W = Electrical work (also energy), Q = Charge, U = Voltage, I = Current, t = Time
- Electrical power: The electrical work performed per unit of time
    - Formula: P = U × I (= W / t)
        - Unit: W ("Watt" = V × A = J / s)
        - P = Power, U = Voltage, I = Current, W = Electrical Work

###### Example Calculation

Through a household appliance in standby mode, a current of 0.5 A still flows. What amount of energy in the form of electrical work will be consumed in one hour if the device has an impedance (=AC resistance) of 12 Ω?

- Sought: Electrical Work W
- Given: Current I, Impedance R, Time t
    - There are different calculation methods; here, the one using voltage and power will be demonstrated.
    - Voltage U = R x I = 12 Ω x 0.5 A = 6 V
    - Electrical power P = U x I = 6 V x 0.5 A = 3 W
    - Work W = P × t = 3 W × 3,600 s = 10,800 J (= 10.8 kJ)

### Direct Current and Alternating Current

In practice, two types of electric current are used: direct current and alternating current.

- Direct current
    - Definition: Current where the positive and negative poles always remain the same.
    - Flow direction: Electrons flow from the negative pole to the positive pole, so always in the same direction.
    - Example: Battery
- Alternating current
    - Definition: Current in which the positive and negative poles are swapped with a constant frequency, or "reversed."
    - Flow direction: Electrons flow from the negative to the positive pole, thus changing their flow direction with the frequency of the pole reversal.
    - Example: Electricity from the socket
    - Mathematical Description
        - Sinusoidal oscillation: U(t) = U0 × sin(ωt)
            - U = Voltage, t = Time, ω = Angular frequency
        - Angular frequency: ω = 2 × π × f = 2 × π / T
            - ω = angular frequency, f = frequency, T = period or oscillation duration

> [!NOTE] Hazard Potential of Electricity
> Alternating current is much more dangerous than direct current, as the heart attempts to follow the faster and stronger electrical impulses of alternating current, leading to ventricular fibrillation. Therefore, direct current is considered life-threatening only at a voltage of 120V, while alternating current is already dangerous at a voltage of 50V! (For details see: Death by electric current)

## Circuits and Electrical Devices

### Simple Circuits

In a circuit, one or more components are electrically connected to each other and to a positive and a negative pole, between which a current flows. To represent such circuits, there is a very simple symbol notation.

| Simple Circuits |        |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    |
| ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | ------ | -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| Component                                                                                           | Symbol | Function                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           |
| Leader                                                                                              |        | - Medium through which charges can flow                                                                                                                                                                                                             |
| Switch (open)                                                                                       |        | - Interrupts the flow of electricity in a circuit                                                                                                                                                                                                  |
| Switch (to)                                                                                         |        | - Closes a circuit so that electricity can flow                                                                                                                                                                                            |
| Lamp                                                                                                 |        | - Example for a consumer, often used as an indicator of whether a circuit is closed and current is flowing                                                                                                                        |
| Direct current source                                                                                 |        | - Produces direct current; Example: Battery                                                                                                                     |
| Resistance                                                                                           |        | - Component with an electrical resistance in ohms that reduces the current flow |
| Voltmeter                                                                                            |        | - Voltage measuring device<br>    - High internal resistance, therefore very little current flows through the measuring device<br>    - Therefore, it is connected in parallel to the load during a measurement                                                                         |
| Amperemeter                                                                                          |        | - Current measuring device<br>    - Low internal resistance, as the current must flow through the measuring device during measurement<br>    - Therefore connected in series with the load during a measurement                                              |

### Series and Parallel Circuit

Components can either be connected one after the other, or "in series," or placed side by side in "parallel" circuits. (Combinations of series and parallel connections are of course also possible). For these two types of circuits, there are some simple rules that also apply by analogy to blood pressure in the circulatory system (see: Basics of Circulation).

|Series and Parallel Circuits|   |   |
|---|---|---|
|Property|Series Circuit|Parallel Circuit|
|---|---|---|
|Definition|Components are sequentially traversed by the same current|Components are simultaneously traversed by a portion of the total current|
|Circuit|||
|Voltage|U1 + U2 = Utotal|U1 = U2 = Utotal|
|Current|I1 = I2 = Itotal|I1 + I2 = Itotal|
|Resistance|R1 + R2 = Rtotal|1 / R1 + 1 / R2 = 1 / Rtotal|

###### Example Calculation

In a circuit, there are three resistors (R1 = 20 Ω, R2 = 25 Ω, R3 = 18 Ω) installed. Determine the total resistance when it is a series connection, and when it is a parallel connection.

- Search: Total resistance Rtotal
- Given: Individual resistors R1, R2, R3; circuit
    - Series connection => Rtotal = R1 + R2 + R3
    - => 20 Ω + 25 Ω + 18 Ω = 63 Ω
    - Parallel connection => 1/Rtotal = 1/R1 + 1/R2 + 1/R3
    - => 1/Rtotal = 1/20 Ω + 1/25 Ω + 1/18 Ω = 0.146 1/Ω
    - => Rtotal = 6.85 Ω

### Mesh Rule (= Second Kirchhoff's Rule)

A loop is referred to as a complete circuit in a circuit when several series-connected subvoltages form a circle. This situation occurs in medicine, for example, in an ECG: Here, the leads I, -II, and III form a loop.

- Requirement: The partial voltages in a series circuit form a loop.
- Consequence: The sum of all partial voltages is zero.
    - U1 + U2 +...+ Ui = 0
- Example ECG: The leads I, -II, III form a mesh
    - UI - UII + UIII = 0 ⇔ UI + UIII = UII

#### Clamp Voltage and Effective Voltage

The voltage measured in a circuit is smaller than the theoretically expected value, as all components have an (albeit small) internal resistance. For an electrical conductor, this internal resistance can be easily calculated:

- Internal resistance of a conductor: Internal resistance is the resistance that each component has because it is made of matter, calculated here for a cylindrical conductor.
    - Formula: R = ρ × l / A
        - Unit: Ω (Ohm)
        - R = Resistance, ρ = Resistivity, l = Length, A = Cross-sectional area
- Resistivity: Also "specific resistance"; is a shape-independent material constant.
    - Unit: Ω × m
- Clamping voltage: Real measured voltage – that is, the voltage that takes into account the internal resistance of the circuit.
    - Formula: Uk = U0 - I × Ri,0
        - Unit: V
        - Uk = clamping voltage, U0 = theoretical voltage without considering internal resistance, I = current, Ri = internal resistance
- Voltage drop: In real circuits, there is a reduction in voltage due to the internal resistance.
    - Formula: U(t) = U0 × e-(t/RC)
        - Unit: V
        - U(t) = voltage as a function of time, U0 = initial voltage, t = time, RC = time constant (also τ)
- Effective voltage: Direct current voltage that has the same effective effect as an alternating current with a certain maximum voltage.
    - Formula: Ueff = Us / √2
        - Unit: V
        - Ueff = Effective voltage (DC), Us = Peak voltage of an AC

> [!NOTE]
> The calculation for the internal resistance of a conductor can also be applied to axons in the nervous system!

### Capacitor

A capacitor is a component that stores electrical charge and thus electrical energy in the form of an electric field between two electrodes that are isolated from each other by a so-called dielectric, which are under voltage. A dielectric is defined as any material that does not have free-moving charge carriers and is therefore only weakly or non-conductive. A dielectric can be a gas, a liquid, or a solid; it often consists of ceramic materials or plastics. The electrical properties of the material are incorporated into the description of the capacitor in the form of the dielectric constant.

- Capacitor: A component that stores charges and thus energy in the form of an electric field.
    - Capacity: Measure of the storage ability, indicates the charge Q that a capacitor can store when a voltage U is applied.
        - Formula: C = Q / U
            - Unit: F (Farad)
            - C = Capacity, Q = Charge, U = Voltage
        - The capacity depends on the shape of the capacitor, the simplest form is the parallel-plate capacitor.
            - Parallel plate capacitor: C = ε0 × ε × A/d
                - Unit: F (Farad)
                - C = capacitance, ε0 = electric field constant, ε = permittivity, A = electrode area, d = electrode distance
        - When multiple capacitors are installed in a circuit, the following applies to their capacitances:
            - Series connection: 1 / Ctotal = 1 / C1 + 1 / C2
            - Parallel connection: Ctotal = C1 + C2
    - Current through a capacitor: I = Q / t (corresponds to the normal formula for current, see above)
        - Unit: A (Ampere)
        - I = current, Q = charge, t = time
    - Time constant (τ): Calculated as the product of resistance R and capacitance C: τ = R × C

###### Example Calculation

A plate capacitor with an electrode area of 5cm², an electrode distance of 6cm, and a dielectric constant of 4.5F/m is under the influence of a voltage of 10V. What is the maximum charge that can be stored in the capacitor?

- Sought: Charge Q
- Given: electrode area A, electrode distance d, permittivity ε, voltage U
    - => C = ε0 × ε × A/d => 8.85 × 10-12 F/m × 4.5 F/m × 0.0005 m2 / 0.06 m = 0.33 × 10-12 F
    - => C = Q / U => Q = C × U
    - => 0.33 × 10^-12 F × 10 V = 3.3 × 10^-12 C

## Electric Current and Magnetism

### Induction and Inductance

Every electric current always generates a magnetic field that is oriented at a 90° angle to the flow direction of the current and is represented by field lines analogous to the electric field. Conversely, changes in the magnetic field (e.g., caused by moving magnets) can also induce an electric voltage. This phenomenon is called induction.

- Magnetic Flux Φ: Totality of the magnetic field lines
    - Unit: Wb (Weber)
- Magnetic flux density B: Magnetic flux through a specific area
    - Formula: B = Φ / A (for field lines perpendicular to the surface)
        - Unit: T (Tesla = V × s / m2 = Wb / m2)
        - B = Magnetic Flux Density, Φ = Magnetic Flux, A = Area
- Inductance L: Property of a coil dependent on material and design, to generate a voltage through a magnetic field.
    - The strength of the inductance is determined by the ratio of the induced voltage to the rate of change of current over time.
        - Formula: U = L × dI/dt (=> L = U / dt/dI)
            - Unit: H (Henry)
            - U = Voltage, L = Inductance, dI/dt = rate of change of current (I = current, t = time)

The magnetic flux density B describes the strength of a magnetic field. The inductance L, on the other hand, is a property of a coil!

#### Transformer

An electrical component where induction plays a significant role is coils, which are used, among other things, in transformers. In the transformer, a current flows through one coil and, through induction, generates a current in a second, neighboring coil that is not connected by a conductor to the first coil. The voltage of the induced current differs from the applied voltage and is mainly dependent on the number of turns of both coils.

- Transformer: Component that converts a current or voltage into another (e.g., for regulation)
    - Ideal Transformer: U2 / U1 = n2 / n1
    - U = Voltage, n = Number of turns of the coil

## Review Questions on the Chapter of Electricity Theory
### Electric Charge

What is an electric field and how is its strength indicated?
- Charges influence each other because they generate an electric field in which Coulomb forces act. The strength of the electric field corresponds to the force per charge (E = F / Q). The field becomes stronger the closer one gets to the charge source that generates it (E = U / d). The field strength can be represented by the so-called field lines. By convention, the field lines run from a positive charge (source) to the negative charge (sink).

### Electric Current

Which physical quantity is measured in amperes (A), and how can this unit be expressed differently (derive this from the formula for the quantity)?
- The unit ampere is used for electric current (I). It indicates how much charge flows through a conductor per unit time (I = Q / t). Therefore, the unit ampere can also be described as the unit of charge divided by the unit of time, i.e., coulomb (C) per second (s).

Assuming that the same amount of current flows through a thick and a thin copper wire per unit of time – in terms of which physical quantity do the two conductors differ?
- The two conductors have different cross-sectional areas and therefore differ in current density j, i.e., the current per (cross-sectional) area flowing (j = I / A).

What is the difference between the (electrical) conductivity and the electrical conductance?
- The (electrical) drift velocity indicates how fast the charges move through the conductor, i.e., the distance they cover per time. In contrast, the electrical conductance is the reciprocal of the resistance (G = 1 / R). The electrical conductance is given as a characteristic value for many electrical components.

What is an electrical resistance and which law can be used to calculate it?
- The electrical resistance R indicates what voltage is necessary for a certain current to flow in a conductor. The resistance can be calculated using Ohm’s law as the quotient of voltage U and current I (R = U / I).

What is electrical work and how can it be calculated (name two formulas)?
- Electrical work refers to the amount of energy required to move a charge against an electric voltage, or the amount released when a charge yields to the "pressure" of an electric voltage. Electrical work can be calculated as the product of charge and voltage (W = Q × U). Since charge can also be described as the product of time and current, electrical work can also be calculated as the product of current, time, and voltage (W = I × t × U).

What does it mean when a light bulb says "60W"?
- The indication "60W" stands for power P, i.e., the electrical energy (W) per time (t) the bulb requires (P = W / t). It is given in the unit W (watt). Since electrical energy can also be calculated as the product of voltage U, current I, and time t, power P can alternatively be calculated as the product of voltage U and current I.

### Circuits and electrical devices

What applies to resistors in a series or in a parallel circuit?
- In a circuit where elements are connected one after the other (= series circuit), the resistances of the elements add up to an overall resistance. In a circuit where all elements are connected side by side and are only flowed through by a part of the total current (= parallel circuit), the reciprocals of the resistances add up, i.e., the conductances of the individual elements add up.

What does the so-called mesh rule state and how can it be applied to the derivation of an ECG according to Einthoven?
- The mesh rule (also called the 2nd Kirchhoff’s law) states that all voltages in a series connection forming a complete loop (the so-called "mesh") add up to zero. This situation is met in an ECG: lead I runs, for example, from the right arm to the left arm, lead III from the left arm to the foot, and lead -II from the foot back to the right arm, thus forming a closed loop. In this situation: UI - UII + UIII = 0.

What does a capacitor do and what does the formula colloquially referred to as the "capacitor equation" state?
- In a capacitor, charge or electrical energy can be stored in the form of an electric field. The storage capacity of the capacitor is described by the so-called capacitance C. The capacitor equation states that this capacitance can be calculated from charge Q divided by voltage U.

How do you calculate the time constant of a capacitor and what does it indicate?
- The time constant (τ) indicates how quickly a capacitor can be charged. This is faster the smaller its capacitance C and its resistance R are. Therefore, the time constant is the product of both (C × R).
### Open Questions on the Chapter of Electricity

What is an electric charge and how does it behave in an electric field?

Describe what electric current is — at the particle level and using Ohm's law.

Draw a circuit in which a lamp is connected to a battery and can be turned on and off with a switch. If one wanted to measure the current or the voltage in this circuit, which measuring devices would need to be used and where would they be placed in the circuit?
