# Airways and Lungs
## Summary

The lungs are responsible for respiration and consist of a right and a left lung lobe. Both lung lobes are further divided into lobules and are traversed by a system of air-conducting pathways (the bronchi). These end in so-called alveoli, where gas exchange takes place. The entire lower respiratory tract, with the exception of the alveoli, is lined with ciliated epithelium, which contributes to the immune defense and cleaning of the lungs. The alveoli, on the other hand, have a very thin epithelial layer, allowing the respiratory gases oxygen and carbon dioxide to diffuse as easily as possible into the surrounding pulmonary capillaries. The pulmonary capillaries belong to the small circulatory system, which carries oxygen-poor blood from the right ventricle to the lungs and oxygen-rich blood from the pulmonary capillaries to the left atrium. The lungs themselves are supplied by a second vascular system. The blood flow to the lungs is also referred to as perfusion and is closely related to ventilation – the distribution of respiratory gases in the lungs. This is driven by pressure differences between the alveolar space and the outside world, which are generated by the respiratory muscles, among other factors.
## Trachea

The trachea connects the larynx to the main bronchi of the lung.

### Macroscopic Anatomy

#### Profile

- Function
    - Forwarding of the breath air from the epiglottis to the main bronchi and vice versa
    - Moistening and warming the inhaled air
    - Immune defense
    - Transport of dirt and mucus from the airways (mucociliary clearance)
- Location: In the neck and mediastinum, ventral to the esophagus
    - Start: Below the ring cartilage (larynx)
    - End: Caudal at the bifurcation of the trachea at the level of the 4th thoracic vertebra.
- Form: Tubular
- Size: Approx. 10 cm long
- Diameter: Approx. 1.5–2 cm

#### Structure

The trachea is made up of horseshoe-shaped cartilage rings that are connected dorsally by a muscle-fibrous tissue plate.

- Front: Approx. 20 horseshoe-shaped cartilage rings, connected to each other by bands (Ligg. anularia)
- Back side (paries membranaceus): Consists of connective tissue and muscles (the so-called M. trachealis)
- Bifurcation of the trachea: Division of the trachea into a right and a left main bronchus at the level of the 4th thoracic vertebra.
    - The left main bronchus branches off horizontally (at an angle of 35° to the direction of the trachea), as it is "elevated" by the heart.
    - The left main bronchus is longer and thinner than the right main bronchus.
    - The right main bronchus deviates by only 20° from the direction of the trachea.
    - In the lumen of the bifurcation, there is a cartilage spur that directs the airflow (carina tracheae).

> [!NOTE] Foreign body aspiration
> When swallowing liquids or foreign bodies, they enter the tracheobronchial system (instead of the esophagus), which is referred to as "aspiration." Frequently, this affects children in their 2nd and 3rd year of life, but also individuals without appropriate protective reflexes. If the protective reflexes are intact, paroxysmal coughing occurs, and stridor and dyspnea may also be present. A life-threatening obstruction of the trachea leads to severe shortness of breath, cyanosis, and asphyxia. However, the objects are usually located in the main and lobar bronchi after aspiration, more often in the right bronchus than in the left due to the steeper angle of departure. In the case of ineffective cough reflex, the Heimlich maneuver can be attempted to mobilize the foreign body.

#### Vascular supply, innervation, and lymphatic drainage

|Vascular supply of the trachea|   |
|---|---|
|Arterial|- Rr. tracheales of the inferior thyroid artery or the internal thoracic artery both from the subclavian artery|
|Venous|- Tracheal veins into the superior vena cava, inferior thyroid vein, or brachiocephalic vein|
|Innervation of the Trachea|   |
|Parasympathetic|- Recurrent laryngeal nerve of the vagus nerve|
|Sympathetic|- Postganglionic branches of the thoracic ganglia III–IV via tracheal branches|
|Lymphatic drainage of the trachea|   |
|Lymph nodes|- Paratracheal lymph nodes<br>- Superior and inferior tracheobronchial lymph nodes (at the tracheal bifurcation)|

#### Topography of the Trachea

| Topography of the Trachea |                                                                                                                 |
| ------------------------- | --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| Location                  | Adjacent Structures                                                                                             |
| Dorsal                    | - Esophagus                                                                                                     |
| Ventral                   | - Thyroid gland<br>- Inferior thyroid vein<br>- Brachiocephalic trunk<br>- Ascending aorta / Superior vena cava |
| Lateral                   | - Recurrent laryngeal nerve<br>- (Also further away, vagus nerve and left subclavian/common carotid artery)     |

### Microscopic Anatomy of the Trachea

The microscopic structure of the trachea is similar to that of the large bronchi (see: Microscopic Anatomy of the Lung).
## Macroscopic Anatomy of the Lung

### Profile

- Form: The lungs resemble a rounded cone.
- Size: Volume of 1.5 L on the right and 1.4 L on the left
- Surface: Approx. 100 m2
- Weight: Approx. 800 g
- Areas and Edges
    - Areas
        - Costal surface
        - Diaphragmatic surface
        - Mediastinal surface
        - Interlobar surface
    - Borders: Anterior and inferior margin

### Structure

The lung consists of two lobes, which can be divided into lung segments and these, in turn, into functional segments. Based on function, one distinguishes between the air-conducting bronchial system and the gas-exchanging alveoli.

#### The air-conducting bronchial system

The lobe and segment division of the lung corresponds to the branching of the bronchial system: A lung lobe thus corresponds to the lung section supplied with air by a lobe bronchus; a lung segment is similarly defined by the supply area of the segmental bronchi.

- Division of the bronchial system
    - The bronchial tree branches dichotomously about 20 times.
    - Depending on the level of the division, one distinguishes between:
        - Main bronchi → Lobar bronchi → Segmental bronchi → Subsegmental bronchi, etc.
    - The division of the bronchi also determines the structure of the lung tissue.
        - Lung lobes → Lung lobules → Lung segments, etc.
- Characteristics of the left lung (due to the position of the heart)
    - Only two lung lobes and a total of nine lung segments on the left (on the right, there are three lobes and 10 segments)
    - Rather "horizontal" departure of the left main bronchus from the trachea

| Macroscopic Anatomy of the Lung |                                                                                                      |                             |                |
| ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | --------------------------- | -------------- |
|                                                                                                                  | Lobar bronchi         | Lung lobes                 | Segments       |
| Right lung                                                                                                      | Upper lobe bronchus     | Upper lobe (superior lobe) | Segments I–III |
| Horizontal fissure                                                                                              |                                                                                                      |                             |                |
| Middle Lobe Bronchus              | Middle Lobe (Lobus medius)                                                                          | Segments IV and V          |                |
| Oblique fissure                                                                                                 |                                                                                                      |                             |                |
| Lower lobe bronchus               | Lower lobe (Lobus inferior)                                                                          | Segments VI–X               |                |
|                                                                                                                  |                                                                                                      |                             |                |
| Linker Lung Lobe                                                                                               | Upper Lobe Bronchus  | Upper Lobe (Superior Lobe) | Segments I–V   |
| Oblique fissure                  |                                                                                                      |                             |                |
| Lower lobe bronchus               | Lower lobe (Lobus inferior)                                                                           | Segments VI, VIII, IX, and X |                |

> [!NOTE]
> The bronchial tree branches off from the tracheal bifurcation about 20 times into two parts each (dichotomously)!

> [!NOTE]
> The right lung can be divided into 10 segments, while the left lung has only 9 segments, as it is missing segment VII!

> [!NOTE]
> Only the right lung has a middle lobe. This lobe is wedge-shaped and located between the upper and lower lobes on the anterior thoracic wall and can only be auscultated from the front!

> [!NOTE]
> From a dorsal view, the lower lobe of the lung on both sides extends cranially and occupies the largest part of the lung wing!

#### Respiratory bronchioles and alveoli

With the respiratory bronchioles begins the gas-exchanging section of the lung. They open into the alveolar duct (ductus alveolaris), which is surrounded in a grape-like formation by a multitude of alveoli (sacculus alveolaris).

- Function: Gas exchange
- Outline: Respiratory bronchioles → Alveolar ducts → Alveolar sacs
- Number: Approximately 300 million alveoli with an area of about 100 m2
- Construction
    - The respiratory bronchioles lead into an alveolar duct, from which the alveolar sacs branch off.
        - From the respiratory bronchioles, individual alveoli also branch off.
    - Alveoli are separated from each other by interalveolar septa, which contain capillaries and elastic fibers.
        - Kohn's pores: Small holes in the alveolar septa that allow the exchange of respiratory air and alveolar fluid between adjacent alveoli

#### Vascular Supply and Innervation

##### Arterial Supply

There are two functionally different systems of arterial vessels in the lung: the pulmonary arteries and the bronchial arteries. While the pulmonary arteries carry deoxygenated blood that is to be oxygenated in the lung, the bronchial arteries are part of the systemic circulation and supply the lung tissue with oxygenated blood. Therefore, the bronchial vessels are also referred to as the vasa privata of the lung, and the pulmonary vessels as the vasa publica of the lung.

- Pulmonary arteries (Vasa publica)
    - Function: Direct the oxygen-poor blood from the right heart through the lungs to enable gas exchange there.
    - Course: Together with similarly named bronchi centrally located in the lobes and segments
    - Outline: Pulmonary trunk → Right and left pulmonary artery → Superior, inferior, and middle lobar arteries → Segmental arteries
- Bronchial arteries (Private vessels)
    - Function: Supply of lung tissue with oxygen-rich blood (except for the alveoli)
    - Course: Departure directly from the thoracic aorta or from the posterior intercostal arteries as bronchial branches.
        - Pulling from dorsal through the lung tissue to the bronchi
        - Course in the peribronchial connective tissue

##### Venous Outflow

The venous system of the lung can be divided analogously to the arteries into pulmonary veins and bronchial veins. The former carry oxygen-rich blood back to the heart, while the latter direct oxygen-poor blood into the right azygos vein and the left hemiazygos vein.

- Pulmonary veins (Vasa publica): Conduct oxygen-rich blood from the lungs to the heart.
    - Course: Between the lung segments in the intersegmental or interlobular connective tissue
        - Superior and inferior pulmonary veins: Each drains directly into the left atrium on the right and left sides.
- Bronchial veins (Private vessels): Carry oxygen-poor blood
    - Drainage: Mainly in the right azygos vein and the left hemiazygos vein
        - A smaller proportion flows into the pulmonary veins.

| Pulmonary veins with their inflows |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               |                                                                                            |
| -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ |
|                                                                                                                | Right Lung                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    | Left Lung |
| Superior pulmonary vein                                                                                         | - Apical vein<br>- Posterior vein<br>- Anterior vein<br>- Middle lobe vein                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           | - Apicoposterior vein<br>- Anterior vein<br>- Lingular vein                                    |
| Inferior pulmonary vein                                                                                      | - Superior vein<br>- Superior basal vein<br>- Anterior basal vein<br>- Common basal vein<br>- Inferior basal vein |                                                                                            |

##### Vegetative Innervation and Lymphatic Drainage

In the lung, there is a subpleural lymphatic drainage system that runs alongside the pulmonary veins, and a peribronchial system that runs alongside the pulmonary arteries. Both converge in the tracheobronchial lymph nodes – for the subpleural system, these are even the first lymph node station. The parasympathetic nervous system primarily mediates bronchoconstriction and secretory production in the bronchi of the lung. In contrast, the sympathetic nervous system induces bronchodilation via β2 receptors.

|Innervation of the Lung|   |
|---|---|
|Autonomous Nerve Plexus|- Pulmonary plexus with<br>    - Parasympathetic fibers from the vagus nerve<br>    - Sympathetic fibers from the thoracic ganglia|
|Lymphatic drainage of the lung|   |
|Lymph Nodes|- Paratracheal lymph nodes on both sides of the trachea<br>    - Tracheobronchial lymph nodes at the origin of the main bronchi<br>        - Bronchopulmonary lymph nodes at the origin of the lobar bronchi<br>        - Intrapulmonary lymph nodes in the lung parenchyma|

> [!NOTE] Bronchial asthma
> Asthma bronchiale is a chronic inflammatory disease of the airways that initially manifests in an episodic manner and is associated with a reversible narrowing (obstruction) of the airways. The causes can be allergens such as pollen (so-called allergic asthma bronchiale) or irritants such as solvent vapors or medications (so-called non-allergic asthma bronchiale). Pathophysiologically, airway obstruction is primarily based on hypersensitivity of the bronchial system with inflammation of the bronchi, mucosal edema, and increased secretion production, as well as bronchospasm and hypertrophy of the smooth muscle. The consequence is a significantly increased outflow resistance for the air already present in the lungs. In an acute attack, this "inability" to exhale leads to shortness of breath and the fear of suffocation, as well as dry coughing and a kind of "wheezing" during exhalation (so-called expiratory stridor).

> [!NOTE] Medication Therapy for Bronchial Asthma
> In the therapy of bronchial asthma, a fundamental distinction must be made between causal therapy (e.g., by avoiding triggering substances or through desensitization) and symptomatic therapy. In symptomatic therapy, the treatment of an acute asthma attack is distinguished from long-term therapy. Both mainly rely on two groups of active substances: glucocorticoids (against inflammatory/allergic processes) and β2-sympathomimetics (for the relaxation of bronchial muscles). Depending on the severity of the disease, additional medications may be used in both acute attacks and long-term therapy.

### Topography

The lung occupies the largest part of the thorax and thus borders almost all structures located there. Clinically, the positional relationships are relevant, for example, in bronchial carcinoma, as they can lead to typical symptoms such as hoarseness.

| Topography of the Lung |     |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             |
| --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | --- | ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| Lung area                                                                                          |     | Spatial relationships of the left lung                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        | Spatial relationships of the right lung                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            |
| Mediastinal surface                                                                                 |     | - Heart (left ventricle and left atrium)<br>- Phrenic nerve, left pericardiacophrenic artery and vein.<br>- Left vagus nerve<br>- Hemiazygos vein<br>- Sympathetic trunk (collateral cord)<br>- Thoracic aorta and left subclavian artery | - Heart (right atrium and right atrium)<br>- Esophagus<br>- Phrenic nerve, right pericardiacophrenic artery and vein.<br>- Right vagus nerve<br>- Azygos vein<br>- Sympathetic trunk<br>- Superior vena cava and right brachiocephalic vein |
| Diaphragmatic Facies                                                                            |     | - Diaphragm                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             |
| Costal Facies                                                                                     |     | - Ribs<br>- Intercostal muscles<br>- A., V., and N. intercostalis                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             |

> [!NOTE]
> The lung adapts to its surroundings, which is why the adjacent organs leave impressions on the lung surface!

> [!NOTE] Pancoast tumor
> Malignant tumors of the lung apex (Pancoast tumors) can lead to specific symptoms due to their anatomical relationships. Through destructive growth into the stellate ganglion of the sympathetic trunk, a triad of deficit symptoms arises, which is also referred to as the "Horner's triad": On the affected side, the eyelid droops (ptosis), the pupil is constricted (miosis), and the eye appears to be displaced backward in the orbit (enophthalmos). Additionally, a Pancoast tumor can infiltrate the brachial plexus, which can lead to sensory and motor deficits as well as arm pain. In these symptom constellations, a lung tumor should definitely be ruled out, meaning further investigations should be conducted to clarify this suspected diagnosis.

#### Lung Hilum

The lung hilum refers to the common vascular and bronchial stem of both lung lobes. The relative position of the lung vessels and bronchi is, for example, important for the interpretation of CT images.

| Position of the vessels and bronchi in the lung hilum |                                           |                                                     |
| ----------------------------------------------------- | ----------------------------------------- | --------------------------------------------------- |
|                                                       | Right Lung Hilum                          | Right Lung Hilum                                    |
| Above back (dorsocranial)                             | Branches of the left pulmonary artery     | Superior, inferior, and medial right lobar bronchus |
| Middle                                                | Left superior and inferior lobar bronchus | Branches of the right pulmonary artery              |
| Below front (ventrocaudal)                            | Branches of the left pulmonary veins      | Branches of the right pulmonary veins               |
## Microscopic Anatomy of the Lung

The lung tissue consists of the bronchial and alveolar tree, as well as the connective tissue in between, which contains blood and lymph vessels. The large bronchi, like the trachea, have a three-layered wall structure, from which the bronchioles and alveoli deviate. The latter have very thin walls to keep the so-called blood-air barrier particularly thin and thus enable optimal gas exchange. By the way, you can find a series of the Histo Trainer on the histology of the lung and trachea at the end of this section.

### Structure of the Bronchial Walls

The wall of the bronchi is, like the wall of the trachea, composed of three layers: The respiratory epithelium (ciliated epithelium) of the tunica mucosa continuously transports dirt and mucus towards the pharynx using movable cilia on the cell surface. The cartilage plates of the tunica fibromusculocartilaginea keep the airways open when the pressure conditions change during inhalation and exhalation. The tunica adventitia contains vessels and nerves.

| Structure of the Bronchi |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |                                                                                                        |
| ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ |
| Histological Layer                                                                                     |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              | Components                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        | Function                                                                                               |
| Mucous membrane                                                                                         | Epithelial layer                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            | - Respiratory epithelium<br>- Goblet cells<br>- Neuroendocrine cells                                                                                | - Mucociliary clearance |
| Lamina propria                                                                                          | - Fibroblasts<br>- Immune cells: macrophages, granulocytes, and lymphocytes<br>- Elastic fibers<br>- Capillary network<br>- Seromucous glands (tracheal glands or bronchial glands) | - Warming of inhaled air through high blood flow<br>- Adaptation to changing thoracic volume during breathing through elastic fibers<br>- Immune defense |                                                                                                        |
| Fibromusculocartilaginous tunic                                                                         | Fibromuscular tunic                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       | - Mesh-like layer of smooth muscle                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        | - Change in diameter to control airflow distribution                                        |
| Cartilaginous tunic                                                                                     | - Hyaline cartilage plates are connected with elastic fibers                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | - Keeping the lumen open regardless of the breathing position                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            |                                                                                                        |
| Tunica adventitia                                                                                       |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              | - Contains vessels, nerves, and connective tissue                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             | - Autonomic regulation and supply                                                                 |

### Bronchioles and Alveoli

In the course of the main bronchi to the respiratory bronchioles, the bronchial walls become thinner and lose more and more of their former characteristics. This allows the different sections of the bronchial tree to be precisely classified. The fine structure of the alveoli is optimally adapted to their gas-exchanging function due to the thin, single-layered walls.

#### Bronchiole

- Structure: Histological layers like in the bronchi with the following characteristics
    - Simple cylindrical ciliated epithelium with individual goblet cells
    - Strong, lattice-like layer of smooth muscle
    - Peribronchiolar, elastic fibers
    - No glands and no cartilage
- Function: Air-conducting (conductive) section of the bronchial tree
- Branching: Into several terminal bronchioles

#### Terminal bronchiole

- Structure: Corresponds to that of the bronchioles with the following characteristics.
    - Simple cubic ciliated epithelium without goblet cells
    - Goblet cells in the epithelial layer: Cilia-free, secretory cells
- Function: Last air-conducting (conductive) section of the bronchial tree, ventilates a so-called lung acinus.
- Branching: Into several respiratory bronchioles

#### Respiratory bronchiole

- Structure: Corresponds to that of a terminal bronchiole with the following characteristics
    - Alveoli may already be found scattered in the wall here.
- Function: First section of the bronchial tree participating in gas exchange
- Bifurcation: The respiratory bronchioles open into the alveoli through the alveolar duct.

> [!NOTE]
> If cartilage and glands are visible in the wall layer, they are bronchi. If neither seromucous glands nor cartilage are present, they are bronchioles!

#### Alveoli

- Pneumocystis Type 1
    - Allow the gas exchange (one of the main components of the blood-air barrier)
    - Are flat epithelial cells that are connected to each other by tight junctions.
    - Cover 95% of the alveolar surface
- Pneumocystis type 2
    - Produces surfactant (phospholipids and special proteins) that reduces surface tension
    - Additional function: Replacement of type-1 pneumocytes in case of tissue injury
    - Are cubic epithelial cells with vacuoles
    - Cover the remaining 5% of the alveolar surface (scattered between the type 1 pneumocytes)
- Alveolar macrophages
    - Move airside over the pneumocytes
    - Phagocytosis of germs and suspended particles
    - About 50 alveolar macrophages per alveolus

> [!NOTE]
> Surfactant reduces the surface tension of the alveoli, thereby decreasing the work of breathing and making normal respiration possible!

> [!NOTE] Apnea syndrome of the newborn
> If a child is born before the 32nd week of pregnancy, type 2 pneumocytes often have not produced enough surfactant to enable normal breathing. Affected children die in about one third of cases despite ventilation. Therefore, efforts are made to accelerate lung maturity in the event of imminent premature birth (so-called "lung maturity induction") by administering a corticosteroid derivative to the mother: Corticosteroids promote a faster maturation of type 2 pneumocytes and thus earlier production of surfactant. Since the 1990s, artificially produced surfactant has also been used in the treatment of affected children.

### Blood-Air Barrier (Alveolar Membrane)

The pulmonary arteries transport oxygen-poor blood to the capillaries, which are adjacent to the alveoli. In order for gas exchange to occur ideally there, the distance between the air and the blood (blood-air barrier) is kept particularly short. From the capillaries, the oxygen-rich blood then flows through the pulmonary veins to the heart.

- Goal: As short a diffusion distance as possible between the air in the alveolar space and the blood in the capillaries.
- Structure (from blood to air)
    - Capillary endothelium: Continuous endothelium
    - Common basal lamina
    - Pneumocystis Type 1
    - Surfactant layer
- Resulting thickness: approx. 0.2–2 μm

### Immune Defense in the Lung

Since the lungs have a very large surface area that is connected to the outside world, the immune defense plays a particularly important role here. It is primarily ensured through mucociliary clearance. The importance of this for human health is evident in diseases such as cystic fibrosis, where mucociliary clearance is impaired.

- Mucociliary Clearance
    - Occurrence: In the ciliated airways
    - Goblet cells and glands produce mucus, which is transported orally along with bacteria and dust by the ciliated epithelium.
- Tissue macrophages
    - Occurrence: Especially in the terminal bronchioles without cilia
    - Phagocytosing bacteria, cell debris, and dirt particles

> [!NOTE] Cystic Fibrosis
> Cystic fibrosis (also known as mucoviscidosis) is caused by a genetic defect that leads to the production of very thick mucus in the lungs, among other areas. Since the cilia of the respiratory epithelium cannot effectively transport this thick mucus, the immune defense of the lungs in affected individuals is impaired. There is an increased occurrence of infections that can irreversibly damage the lungs over time. Although new therapeutic options in recent years have significantly improved prognosis, the median life expectancy remains only 53 years. In this context, lung function is crucial for prognosis, so a lung transplant may be essential.

## Function of the Lungs at a Glance

The main function of the lungs is to absorb oxygen into the blood and to release carbon dioxide into the breath. For this, the inhaled air must first reach the alveoli (see: respiratory mechanics). The blood flow (perfusion) of the lung vessels is adjusted to the partial pressure of oxygen to optimize the ventilation-perfusion ratio (see: Euler-Liljestrand mechanism). The respiratory center adjusts breathing to meet the needs of the entire organism.

- Function of the lungs
    - Oxygenation of pulmonary arterial blood
        - Exchange of respiratory gases O2 and CO2 between blood and alveolar space (see: gas exchange)
        - Supply of the alveoli with fresh air (see: respiratory mechanics)
        - Ensuring a fixed ratio between ventilation and perfusion of the lung sections (see: Ventilation and Perfusion)
    - pH Regulation (see: The Role of the Lungs in pH Regulation)

## Gas Exchange

The gas exchange is the actual function of the lungs: oxygen is absorbed into the blood (oxygenation), carbon dioxide is released into the breath (decarboxylation).

- Goal
    - Oxygen uptake (Normal value at rest: 310 mL/min)
    - Carbon dioxide output (normal value at rest: 260 mL/min)
        - Also serves the pH regulation (see also: acid-base balance)
- Mechanism: Diffusion of respiratory gases through the blood-air barrier and transport away or towards with the blood
    - Alveolar-capillary contact time of the blood: Approx. 0.3–0.8 s
    - Diffusion is dependent on Fick's law.
        - Partial pressure difference between blood and breath air (ΔPO2: 8 kPa; ΔPCO2: 0.8 kPa)
        - Diffusion conductivity (so-called Krogh diffusion coefficient): A material-dependent characteristic (for CO2 it is about 23 times larger than for O2)
        - Available area (approximately 100 m2)
        - Diffusion path (approximately 0.6 μm)
- According to Dalton's law, the partial pressures are given by: pGas = ptotal × FGas
- Alveolar gas equation: Formula for calculating the alveolar oxygen partial pressure
    - Formula: palvO2 = pinspO2 - paCO2 / RQ
        - palvO2 = Alveolar oxygen partial pressure
        - pinspO2 = Inspiratory Oxygen Partial Pressure
            - Under STPD conditions: pinspO2 = FiO2 × patm = 0.21 × 760 mmHg = 159.6 mmHg ≈ 160 mmHg
            - Under ATPS conditions: pinspO2 = FiO2 × (patm - pH2O) = 0.21 × (760 mmHg - 47 mmHg) = 149.73 mmHg ≈ 150 mmHg
        - paCO2 = Partial pressure of carbon dioxide in arterial blood
        - RQ = Respiratory Quotient (nutrition-dependent quotient from CO2 output and O2 uptake)
    - Simplified formula: palvO2 = 145 - paCO2

| Partial pressures in exhaled air and lung capillaries                                                                                       |                                                                         |                                                                       |                                                                     |                                                                     |
| ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | ----------------------------------------------------------------------- | --------------------------------------------------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------- |
|                                                                                                                                             | CO2 partial pressure                                                    | O2 partial pressure                                                   | N2 partial pressure                                                 | H2O partial pressure                                                |
| In the inspiration air (under STPD conditions)                                                                                              | - 0.3 mmHg (≈0.04 kPa)<br>    - Corresponds to a CO2 fraction of ≈0.04% | - 160 mmHg (≈21 kPa)<br>    - Corresponds to an O2 fraction of ≈21%   | - 593 mmHg (≈79 kPa)<br>    - Corresponds to an N2 fraction of ≈78% | - 0 mmHg (≈0 kPa)                                                   |
| In the lung capillaries/alveoli (under BTPS conditions, expiratory values that essentially arise from the partial pressures in the alveoli) | - 40 mmHg (≈5.3 kPa)<br>    - Corresponds to a CO2 fraction of ≈5%      | - 100 mmHg (≈13.3 kPa)<br>    - Corresponds to an O2 fraction of ≈14% | - 573 mmHg (≈76 kPa)<br>    - Corresponds to an N2 fraction of ≈75% | - 47 mmHg (≈6.3 kPa)<br>    - Corresponds to an H2O fraction of ≈6% |
| In the exhaled air (at ATPS conditions)                                                                                                     | - 27 mmHg (≈3.6 kPa)<br>    - Corresponds to a CO2 fraction of ≈4%      | - 120 mmHg (≈16 kPa)<br>    - Corresponds to an O2 fraction of ≈16%   | - 566 mmHg (≈75 kPa)<br>    - Corresponds to an N2 fraction of ≈74% | - 47 mmHg (≈6.3 kPa)<br>    - Corresponds to a H2O fraction of ≈6%  |

> [!NOTE]
> The partial pressures and thus the gas exchange of O2 and CO2 in the alveolar gas mixture depend on O2 uptake, CO2 release, and alveolar ventilation. It holds true that: The greater the alveolar ventilation, the greater the alveolar O2 partial pressure and the lower the CO2 partial pressure!

> [!NOTE]
> The O2 and CO2 partial pressures of the blood completely adjust to the alveolar O2 and CO2 partial pressures over the course of the pulmonary capillary!

> [!NOTE] Interstitial lung diseases
> In interstitial lung diseases (e.g., pulmonary fibrosis), there is an increase in connective tissue throughout the lung, including in the area between alveoli and capillaries. This results in an increased diffusion distance and impaired gas exchange. Clinically, this is referred to as reduced diffusion capacity. It is determined by having patients inhale a defined amount of carbon monoxide and subsequently checking how much of it was absorbed into the blood. Additionally, the connective tissue changes reduce lung elasticity and, consequently, vital capacity.

## Ventilation

Ventilation refers to the distribution of breathing air to the various parts of the lungs. It is responsible for supplying the alveoli with fresh air, allowing for gas exchange to take place there. Those sections of the airways that only conduct air and do not participate in gas exchange are referred to as dead space.

- Rooms of ventilation: In ventilation, a distinction is made between the alveolar space and the dead space.
    - Alveolar space: Portion of the airways that participate in gas exchange
    - Functional dead space: the portion of the airways that is ventilated but does not participate in gas exchange.
        - Normal value (in adults): Approximately 150–200 mL
        - Classification
            - Anatomical Dead Space: Air-Conducting Airways
                - Can be calculated, for example, through dead space ventilation.
                    - Anatomical dead space = dead space ventilation/breathing frequency
            - Alveolar dead space: Alveoli that are ventilated but not perfused, and therefore do not participate in gas exchange.
        - Calculation of the functional dead space
            - Bohr dead space formula: VT = VE × (1 - (FECO2 / FACO2))
                - VT = Total volume
                - VE = Expiratory volume
                - FECO2 = CO2 fraction in the exhaled air
                - FACO2 = CO2 fraction in the alveoli
- Parameters of ventilation
    - Tidal volume (minute ventilation, MV): The volume of air that is inhaled or exhaled per minute.
        - Tidal volume = tidal volume × respiratory rate
            - Respiratory rate: breaths per minute
    - Alveolar ventilation: The portion of the tidal volume that reaches the alveoli and participates in gas exchange.
        - Alveolar ventilation = (Tidal volume - Dead space volume) × Breathing frequency
        - Ventilation coefficient: Proportion of the alveolar gas mixture that is exchanged per breath (at rest 0.1–0.12)
    - Dead space ventilation: Air volume that flows through the anatomical dead space per minute.
        - Total ventilation = Tidal volume - alveolar ventilation

| Normal and pathological ventilation |           |                                                                                         |                          |
| -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | --------- | --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | ------------------------ |
|                                                                                                                      | Normal value  | Designation when lowered                                                            | Designation when elevated |
| Respiratory Rate                     | 16–20/min | Bradypnea (<10/min)                                                                     | Tachypnea (>20/min)      |
| Tidal Volume                          | 0.5 L    | Hypopnea | Hyperpnea                |
| Tidal volume                         | 7.5 L/min | Hypoventilation                                                                         | Hyperventilation         |

> [!NOTE]
> If the alveolar ventilation increases, for example, during hyperventilation, more CO2 is exhaled: The CO2 partial pressure decreases in both the blood and the exhaled air! Conversely, if the alveolar ventilation decreases, there will be rising CO2 concentrations in both the blood and the exhaled air!

> [!NOTE]
> If the alveolar ventilation increases, the alveolar and arterial O2 partial pressure also rise. The alveolar O2 partial pressure approaches the O2 partial pressure of the inspired air. Conversely, if the alveolar ventilation decreases, the arterial O2 partial pressure also falls!

## Perfusion

Since the entire blood volume of the body must pass through the lungs, pulmonary blood flow corresponds to the cardiac output. However, the distribution of blood to the lung sections has a significant impact on blood oxygenation. Therefore, it is precisely regulated by special reflexes such as the Euler-Liljestrand mechanism. Details on lung metabolism are presented in exercise physiology (see: exercise physiology and aging).

- Pulmonary circulation: Corresponds to the cardiac output (approximately 5 L/min)
- Distribution of blood flow: Blood flow in the lung base is greater than in the lung apex due to gravity.
- Blood pressure in the pulmonary vessels
    - Pulmonary artery pressure (pressure in the pulmonary artery)
        - Pulmonary arterial mean pressure (mPAP): 15 mmHg
        - Systolic: 15–25 mmHg, diastolic: 8–15 mmHg
    - Mean pulmonary capillary pressure: approx. 8 mmHg
        - Remains low even with higher cardiac output, as the pulmonary capillaries passively open with increased pressure.
- Ventilation-Perfusion Ratio
    - Calculation: Ventilation-Perfusion Ratio = Alveolar Ventilation (VA) / Alveolar Perfusion (QA)
        - Physiologically, alveolar ventilation (VA) and alveolar perfusion (QA) are approximately equal, resulting in a ventilation-perfusion ratio for the entire lung of about 1 → This leads to a normal alveolar gas composition (paO2 of 100 mmHg and paCO2 of 40 mmHg)
        - If the lung is not ventilated at all, VA / QA = 0, and the alveolar gas composition approaches that of venous blood.
        - If the lung is not perfused at all, it holds that: VA / QA = ∞ and the alveolar gas composition approaches that of the atmosphere.
    - The ventilation-perfusion ratio should be kept as constant as possible.
        - Hypoxic pulmonary vasoconstriction (Euler-Liljestrand mechanism): To maintain a constant ventilation-perfusion ratio, the blood vessels in the lungs respond to a lack of oxygen with vasoconstriction.
- Physiological inhomogeneity of the ventilation-perfusion ratio
    - The ventilation-perfusion ratio is greater at the lung apex than at the lung base → O2 partial pressures are higher at the lung apex than at the lung base
- Shunt perfusion
    - Anatomical shunt: Approximately 2–5% of the cardiac output is diverted past the alveoli (blood from bronchial arteries, pleural vessels, veins of the left ventricle, and pulmonary arteriovenous anastomoses) and physiologically does not participate in gas exchange.
    - Intrapulmonary right-to-left shunt: Perfused but non-ventilated alveoli do not contribute to the oxygenation of the blood.

## Breath Regulation

The regulation of breathing occurs centrally in the so-called respiratory center in the medulla oblongata. It causes a rhythmic innervation of the respiratory muscles and is influenced by various respiratory stimuli.

- Breathing center: Nerve cell cluster in the reticular formation of the medulla oblongata
    - Innervate the respiratory muscles rhythmically → Inhalation and exhalation
    - Is influenced by respiratory stimuli
        - Strongest respiratory drive under normal conditions: Increased CO2 partial pressure
        - Strongest respiratory drive in chronic hypercapnia (e.g., in COPD): Decreased O2 partial pressure

| Respiratory stimuli                                                                                       |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       |
| ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
|                                                                                                            | Stimulating                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          | Dampening                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              |
| Central nervous respiratory stimuli | - Physical effort over<br>    - Information from proprioceptors<br>    - Direct co-innervation of the respiratory center by motoneurons                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                | - Hering-Breuer reflex<br>    - Function: Stops inspiration during strong lung expansion<br>    - Mechanism: Mediated by lung expansion receptors (via the vagus nerve)<br>    - Goal: Protects alveoli from damage |
| Chemical respiratory stimuli  | - Via central chemoreceptors in the medulla oblongata<br>    - In particular, increase in CO2 or decrease in pH in the cerebrospinal fluid<br>- Via peripheral chemoreceptors in the aorta and the carotid artery (glomus caroticum)<br>    - In particular, decrease in O2 partial pressure<br>    - Increase in CO2 partial pressure<br>    - Decrease in pH | - CO2 partial pressure starting at 70 mmHg in the blood                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    |
| Unspecific respiratory stimuli     | - Fever, pain, adrenaline<br>- Mild hypothermia<br>- Progesterone                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     | - Increase in blood pressure                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    |

> [!NOTE]
> A CO2 partial pressure of 70 mmHg or higher suppresses the respiratory center instead of stimulating it. This is also referred to as CO2 narcosis!

> [!NOTE]
> Hyperventilation lowers the CO2 partial pressure in the blood and thus also the drive to breathe. If the O2 reserves in the blood are depleted before the CO2 accumulation leads to the urge to breathe, this can result in unconsciousness. Hyperventilation is particularly dangerous during apnea diving (so-called swimming pool blackout), as the lack of the breathing urge does not compel surfacing, posing a risk of death by drowning.

> [!NOTE]
> Sog. feedback respiratory stimuli (e.g., chemical respiratory stimuli, Hering-Breuer reflex) are reduced in the sense of negative feedback by the changes in breathing they provoke. If breathing increases, for example, due to an elevated CO2 partial pressure, this will be reduced again, leading to the normalization of breathing. In contrast, non-feedback respiratory stimuli (e.g., fever, pain) continue to have an effect even when breathing changes!

### Pathological Breathing Patterns

Some breathing patterns allow for conclusions to be drawn about the underlying disorder. They are summarized in the following table.

| Pathological Breathing Patterns |                                                                                                                                                                                                                           |                                                                                                                         |
| ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
|                                                                                                            | Characteristics                                                                                                                                                                                                          | Possible Causes                                                                                                         |
| Kussmaul breathing           | - Deep, rhythmic breathing (CO2 should be exhaled)      | - Metabolic acidosis                     |
| Biotic Breathing                                                                                         | - Deep breathing with sudden pauses                                                                                                       | - Increased intracranial pressure<br>- Brain injury |
| Cheyne-Stokes breathing                                                                                       | - Periodic rise and fall in breathing depth with hyper- and hypoventilatory phases and breathing pauses → When time is depicted, the breathing activity appears spindle-shaped                                                    | - Damage to the respiratory center            |
| Snapping breath                                                                                             | - Individual, deep breaths with long pauses between breaths                                                                                                                                                                | - Cardiac arrest                                                                                                       |

### Development of the Lung

The structure for the later lung develops as a so-called lung bud in the ventral foregut. Through approximately 20 divisions of the lung bud into two daughter structures each (dichotomous branching), the bronchial tree of a lung is formed. For the gas-exchanging function of the lung, particularly the onset of surfactant production around the 24th week of gestation is significant, marking the beginning of the fetus's viability. The entire lung development can be divided into five phases: embryonic phase, pseudoglandular phase, canalicular phase, saccular phase, and alveolar phase.

### Embryonic Phase: Development of the Lung Buds

- Time: Approximately until the 6th week of pregnancy.
- Meaning: The starting structure of all epithelia and glands of the trachea, bronchial system, lungs, and larynx.
- Process
    - The laryngotracheal groove forms ventrally in the foregut.
    - This protrudes ventrally and forms a left and a right lung bud.
    - The esophagotracheal septum develops between the foregut and lung buds and incompletely separates them.
        - A small connection remains in the area of the future pharynx.
    - From the lung buds, the left and right main bronchi with the lobar bronchi develop.

> [!NOTE]
> Epithelial cells and glands of the respiratory tract arise from the foregut, while mesenchymal components such as cartilage, blood vessels, and connective tissue develop from the mesoderm into which the lung bud grows!

### Fetal Developmental Phases: Dichotomous Branching

- Time: From around the 6th week of gestation to the 8th year of life
- Meaning: Through successive bifurcation (dichotomous branching) of the bronchial tree, the large internal surface area needed for gas exchange is created.
- Process: One distinguishes four fetal phases:
    1. Pseudoglandular Phase (approx. 6th–16th week of pregnancy)
        - The lobe bronchi further divide into segmental bronchi.
        - Through further dichotomous divisions, the bronchial tree is formed up to the terminal bronchioles.
        - The bronchoepithelial cells begin the production of amniotic fluid.
        - Histology of the distal bronchi resembles tubulo-acinous glands and shows a single layer of cuboidal to cylindrical epithelium.
    2. Canalicular phase (approx. 16th to 26th week of pregnancy).
        - The respiratory bronchioles sprout from the terminal bronchioles.
        - Pneumocytes type I and type II begin to differentiate.
    3. Secular Phase (approx. 26th week of pregnancy until birth)
        - Alveolar ducts and alveolar sacs are formed.
        - Blood capillaries multiply and form a shared basement membrane with the lung epithelium.
    4. Alveolar Phase (last weeks of pregnancy to 8 years of age)
        - Alveoli with thin-walled septa mature.
        - Growth of the entire lung

> [!NOTE]
> The beginning of surfactant production around the 24th week of gestation is a crucial step for the viability of the unborn child!

## Review Questions on the Chapter Respiratory Tract and Lungs
### Trachea

Where does the trachea begin and how far does it extend downward?
- The trachea is about 10 cm long; it begins below the cricoid cartilage and ends at the bifurcation of the trachea at the level of the 4th thoracic vertebral body (→ division into the two main bronchi).
How do the right and left main bronchi differ from each other, and what is their clinical relevance?
- The right main bronchus runs steeper and has a larger lumen than the left main bronchus. Therefore, aspirated objects are more likely to enter the right main bronchus.
### Macroscopic Anatomy of the Lung

Describe briefly the macroscopic structure of the lung and name its functional sections!
- The lung consists of two conical lung lobes, which can be divided into lung lobes with segments. On the right, there are three lung lobes with 10 segments, on the left two lung lobes with 9 segments. Functionally, the air-conducting bronchial system is distinguished from the gas-exchanging section (respiratory bronchioles and alveoli).
What is a lung segment?
- The lobe and segment division of the lung corresponds to the splitting of the bronchial system. A lung segment thus refers to the area supplied by a segmental bronchus.
Where is the middle lobe located and where can it be auscultated?
- Only the right lung has a middle lobe. It lies wedge-shaped between the upper and lower lobes at the anterior thoracic wall and can only be auscultated from the ventral side.
How is the gas-exchanging section of the lung structured?
- The respiratory bronchioles open into an alveolar duct, from which the alveolar sacs branch off.
What is meant by the Vasa privata and the Vasa publica of the lung?
- The vasa publica of the lung are the pulmonary arteries; they carry oxygen-poor blood from the right heart to the lung, where gas exchange takes place. Thus, they serve the entire organism and are not only for the lung’s own supply. The bronchial arteries – bronchial branches (from the thoracic aorta and the posterior intercostal arteries) – are the vasa privata of the lung and supply it arterially.
Do the venae of the lungs run alongside the bronchi as well?
- The pulmonary veins, in contrast to the pulmonary arteries, do not run with the bronchi but between the lung segments.
How is the lymphatic drainage system of the lung structured?
- In the lung, there is a subpleural lymphatic drainage system that runs with the pulmonary veins. Besides, there is a peribronchial system that runs with the pulmonary arteries. Both flow together into the tracheobronchial lymph nodes.
What structures border the mediastinal surface of the right and left lung?
- The lung surfaces facing the mediastinum (mediastinal surfaces) of the right and left lungs border the heart, the phrenic nerve, the vagus nerve, as well as the pericardiacophrenic artery and vein of the respective side and the sympathetic trunk. The mediastinal surface of the right lung also borders the esophagus, the azygos vein, the superior vena cava, and the right brachiocephalic vein; that of the left lung borders the thoracic aorta, the left subclavian artery, and the hemiazygos vein.
Describe the position of the vessels and bronchi in the lung hilum on the left and right!
- In the right lung hilum, the main bronchus lies above the pulmonary artery or almost at the same level. In the left lung hilum, the main bronchus lies hyparterial, i.e., caudal to the pulmonary artery. The branches of the pulmonary veins are always located ventrocaudally (below and in front).
### Microscopic Anatomy of the Lung

Describe the general wall structure of the trachea and the bronchi!
- The wall of the bronchi, like that of the trachea, consists of three layers: tunica mucosa, tunica fibromusculocartilaginea, and tunica adventitia.
Which cells are located in the epithelial lamina of the bronchi?
- The epithelial lamina of the mucosa in the bronchi and trachea contains respiratory epithelium, goblet cells, and neuroendocrine cells.
Which glands are located in the tissue of the bronchi or the trachea, and in which layer are they situated?
- The lamina propria of the tunica mucosa in the bronchi and trachea contains seromucous glands (tracheal or bronchial glands).
An alveolus is histologically characterized by its thin walls and the presence of a large surface area for gas exchange, which can be observed under the microscope.
- Alveoli have a rounded basic shape with a diameter of about 100 μm. Their walls consist of alveolar septa containing capillaries and elastic fibers and are covered by a single layer of squamous epithelium.
How does the fine tissue structure of the bronchioles differ from that of the larger bronchi?
- The bronchioles have the same histological layers as the bronchi but contain no glands and no cartilage tissue. They are covered by a single-layered, cylindrical (!) ciliated epithelium with individual goblet cells. Peribronchiolarly, there are elastic fibers. The structure of the terminal bronchioles corresponds to that of the bronchioles but they contain, as a peculiarity, single-layered cuboidal (!) ciliated epithelium without goblet cells and Club cells, which secrete surfactant proteins as part of nonspecific defense. The respiratory bronchioles finally are the first section participating in gas exchange. Accordingly, they contain isolated alveoli; otherwise, their structure corresponds to the terminal bronchioles.
What are the histological characteristics of type 2 pneumocytes and what is their function?
- Type 2 pneumocytes are cuboidal cells that produce surfactant to reduce surface tension. In histological preparations, they contain vacuoles because during preparation the lamellar bodies with surfactant are dissolved out.
What cell type, besides type 1 and type 2 pneumocytes, can also be found in alveoli?
- About 50 alveolar macrophages are found in each alveolus. They move on the air side over the pneumocytes and phagocytize germs and suspended particles.
### Gas Exchange

What is referred to as alveolocapillary contact time and how long is it approximately?
- Alveolocapillary contact time indicates how long the deoxygenated blood is in contact with the alveolus (i.e., the time during which gas exchange can take place). It is usually less than 0.8 seconds.
What are the partial pressures of CO2 and O2 in the alveolus, and what percentage does O2 constitute of the total air within the alveolus?
- In the alveolus as well as in exhaled air, the partial pressure of CO2 under standard conditions is about 40 mmHg, that of O2 about 100 mmHg. The O2 fraction of the air within the alveolus normally amounts to about 14%.
How do the partial pressures of O2 and CO2 in blood and alveoli relate to each other after gas exchange has completed?
- The O2 and CO2 partial pressures of the blood completely equalize along the course of the pulmonary capillary to the alveolar O2 and CO2 partial pressures.
### Ventilation

What is referred to as anatomical dead space and how can it be calculated?
- Anatomical dead space refers to the air-conducting respiratory pathways that do not participate in gas exchange. It can be calculated, for example, by the dead space ventilation: Anatomical dead space = dead space ventilation / respiratory rate.
How is the tidal volume calculated?
- Minute ventilation = tidal volume × respiratory rate.
What is alveolar ventilation and how is it calculated?
- Alveolar ventilation corresponds to the volume of air exchanged per minute in the alveoli: Alveolar ventilation = (tidal volume - dead space volume) × respiratory rate.
How does the CO2 partial pressure in the blood and in the exhaled air behave with increasing alveolar ventilation?
- If alveolar ventilation increases, the CO2 partial pressure decreases both in the blood and in the exhaled air.
### Perfusion

What is the ventilation-perfusion ratio in the lung apex compared to the lung base?
- Due to gravity, blood flow is stronger in the lung base than in the lung apex. As a result, oxygen from the inhaled air can be transported away faster in the lung base, so the O2 partial pressure here is lower than in the lung apex. Accordingly, the ventilation-perfusion ratio in the lung base is smaller than in the lung apex.
What is the approximate mean pulmonary arterial pressure (mPAP)?
- The mean pulmonary arterial pressure (pressure in the pulmonary artery, mPAP) is about 15 mmHg.
How is the mean pulmonary capillary pressure kept low?
- The mean blood pressure of the pulmonary capillaries is about 8 mmHg and remains low even at higher cardiac output by passive dilation of the pulmonary capillaries with increasing pressure.
What is meant by hypoxic vasoconstriction?
- To keep the ventilation-perfusion ratio constant, the vessels of the lung react to oxygen deficiency with vasoconstriction (Euler-Liljestrand mechanism).
### Breath Regulation

Describe the Hering-Breuer reflex!
- The Hering-Breuer reflex protects the alveoli from damage by stopping inspiration when the lung is strongly stretched. It is mediated by lung stretch receptors (via the vagus nerve).
What effect does hyperventilation have before apnea diving and what is the danger in it?
- Hyperventilation lowers the CO2 partial pressure in the blood and thus also the respiratory drive. This allows holding the breath longer, but there is a danger that the O2 reserves run out faster than CO2 accumulates, which results in loss of consciousness. At this point, an autonomous respiratory reflex may occur, causing water aspiration – a life-threatening scenario! With apnea diving without prior hyperventilation, the respiratory drive is so strong that one is literally forced to resurface.
What pathological breathing pattern can occur in metabolic acidosis?
- In metabolic acidosis, the so-called Kussmaul breathing can occur compensatorily. Through deep, rhythmic breaths, more CO2 is exhaled.